Anthony, Eric, hello, and welcome to Talk Python.
Hey, guys. It's really good to have you both here.
You both have been on the show before, which is awesome.
And, Eric, we've talked about subinterpreters before,
but they were kind of a dream almost at the time.
That's right.
And now they feel pretty real.
Yeah, it's been a long time coming.
and I think the last time we talked,
I've always been hopeful,
but it seemed like it was getting closer.
So with 312, we were able to land
per interpreter Gill,
which kind of was the last piece,
the foundational part I wanted to do.
A lot of cleanup,
a lot of work that had to get done,
but that last piece got in for 312.
Excellent, excellent.
So good.
And maybe let's just do a quick check-in with you all.
It's been a while.
You know, Anthony, start with you, I guess.
Quick intro for people who don't know you, although I don't know how that's possible.
And then just what you've been up to.
Yeah, I'm Anthony Shaw.
I work at Microsoft to lead the Python advocacy team.
And I do lots of Python stuff, open source.
Testing things, building tools, blogging, building projects, sharing things.
book something about the inside of python yeah i forget about that um yeah there's a book called
c python internals which is a book about all about the python compiler and how it works
and suppress the memory of writing it like it was too traumatic it's down there yeah i keep forgetting
um yeah that book was for 3.9 and people keep asking me if i'm going to update it
for 3.13 maybe because things keep changing yeah things are definitely changing at a more rapid
pace than they were a few years ago as well so that maybe makes it more challenging yeah recently
I've been doing some more research as well so I just finished my master's a few months ago and
started my PhD and I'm looking at parallelism in Python is one of the topics so I've been
quite involved in sub-interpreters and the free threading project and some other stuff as well.
Awesome. Congratulations on the master's degree. That's really great. And I didn't realize you were
going further. So cool. Eric. Yeah, Eric Snow. So I've been working on Python as a core developer for
over 10 years now,
but I've been kind of participating
for even longer than that.
And it's been good.
I've worked on a variety of things,
a lot of stuff down in the core runtime of CPython.
And I've been working on this,
trying to find a solution for multi-core Python
since really since 2014.
So I've been slowly, ever so slowly, working towards kind of that goal.
And we've made it with 3.12, and there's more work to do.
But that's kind of a lot of the stuff that I've been working on.
I'm at Microsoft, but don't work with Anthony a whole lot.
I work on the Python performance team with Guido and Brant Booger and Mark Shannon, Eric Cutrell,
And we're just working generally to make Python faster.
So my part of that has involved sub-interpreters.
But interestingly enough, it's only really this year
that I've been able to work on all this sub-interpreter stuff full-time.
Before that, I was working mostly on other stuff.
So this year has been a good year for me.
Yeah, I would say that must be really exciting to get the,
you know what, why don't you just do that?
That'd be awesome for us.
Yeah, it's been awesome.
Well, maybe since you're on the team,
let's a quick check-in on FasterCpython.
It's made a mega difference over the last couple of releases.
Yeah, it's kind of interesting.
Mark Shannon definitely has a vision.
He's developed a plan as of years ago,
but we finally were able to get him,
put him in a position where he could do something about it.
And we've all been kind of pitching in.
A lot of it has to do with just applying some of the general ideas that are out
there regarding dynamic languages and optimization and things have been applied
to other things like HHVM or,
or various of the JavaScript runtimes.
And so a lot of specialization, adaptive specialization,
a few other techniques.
But right now, so a lot of that stuff
we're able to get in for 3.11.
In 3.12, there wasn't quite as much impactful stuff.
It was, we're kind of gearing up to effectively
add a JIT into CPython.
And that's required a lot of kind of behind the scenes work to get things in the right places.
So we're somewhat targeting 3.13 for that.
So right now, I think with where things are at, we're kind of break even performance wise.
But there's a lot of stuff that we can do.
A lot of optimization work that really hasn't even been done yet that'll take that performance improvement up pretty drastically.
It's kind of hard to say where we're going to be, but for 3.13, it's looking pretty good for at least some performance improvement because of the jitting and optimization work.
That's exciting.
Yeah, we have no real jit at the moment, right?
Not in CPython.
Yeah.
I mean, I know.
Anthony did his best.
I know.
Well, that's actually super exciting
because I feel like that could be another big boost,
potentially.
You know, legit,
you come to all sorts of things
like inlining of small methods
and optimization based on type information.
And yeah.
Yep.
All that stuff.
One of the most exciting parts for me
is that a lot of this work,
not long after I joined the team,
So two years ago, two and a half years ago, somewhere in there, pretty early on, we started reaching out to other folks, other projects that were interested in performance and performance of Python code.
and we've worked pretty hard to collaborate with them.
So like the team over at Meta,
they have a lot of interest in making sure Python is very efficient.
And so we've actually worked pretty closely with them
and they're able to take advantage of a lot of the work that we've done,
which is great.
Yeah, there seems to be some synergy between the Cinder team
and the faster CPython team.
So awesome. But let's focus on a part that is there, but not really utilized very much yet, which is the sub interpreter.
So back on, when is this, 2019?
Eric, I had you on.
We talked about can subinterpreters free us from Python's gil?
And then since then, this PEP has been accepted.
But it's Anthony's fault that we're here.
Because Anthony posted over on Mastodon, hey, here's a new blog post.
Me running Python parallel applications with subinterpreters.
how about we use flask and fast api and sub interpreters and make that go fast and that
sounded more available in the python level than i kind of realized the sub interpreter stuff was so
that's that's super exciting both of you yeah it's been fun to play with it and try and build
applications on it and stuff like that um and working with Eric probably over the last couple
of months on things that we've discovered in that process um especially with the extensions
yeah yeah that was that's yeah that's one um with c extensions and i think that those
some of those challenges are going to be um the same with free threading as well so it's how c
extensions have state where they put it, whether that's thread safe.
And as soon as you kind of open up the possibility of having multiple gills in one process, then
what challenges does that create?
Absolutely.
Well, I guess maybe some nomenclature first.
Not no GIL python or subinterpreter python.
Free threaded.
Is that what we're calling it?
what's the name how do we how do we speak about this it's not quite settled but i think a lot of
people have taken to referring to it as free threaded no i can go with that people still
talk about no GIL but it's free thread it's probably the best bet are you describing
what it does and why you care or are you describing the implementation right like the
implementation is it has no GIL so it can be free threaded or it has sub interpreters
so it can be free-threaded.
But really what you want is the free-threaded part.
You don't care actually about the gil too much, right?
Kind of.
Well, it's interesting.
With sub-interpreters,
it really isn't necessarily a free-threaded model.
It's kind of free-threaded only in the part
at which you're moving between interpreters.
So you only have to care about it
when you're interacting between interpreters
the rest of the time you don't have to worry about it.
But with the no-gil is more kind of the,
what we think of as free threading work.
Everything is unsafe.
- And for people who don't know the no-gil stuff
is what's coming out of the sender team
and from Sam Gross and that was also approved,
but with the biggest caveat I've ever seen
on an approved pep.
- Yeah.
- Like we approve this,
we also reserve the right to completely undo it
and not approve it anymore, but fair.
And it's also a compiler flag that is an optional off by default situation.
So it should be interesting.
Yeah, we can maybe compare and contrast them a bit later as well.
Yeah, absolutely.
Well, let's start with what is an interpreter.
So then how do we get to sub-interpreters?
And then what work did you have to do?
I heard there was a few global variables that were being shared, Eric.
Maybe let's give people a quick rundown of like, what is this and how is it, this new feature in 3.12 changing things?
Yeah, subinterpreters, in a Python process, when you run Python, everything that happens, all the machinery that's running your Python code is running with a certain amount of global state.
And historically, you can think of it as, you know, across the whole process.
You've got a bunch of global state.
If you look at all the stuff like in the sys module, sys.modules or sys.whatever, all those things are shared across the whole runtime.
So if you have different threads, for instance, running, they all share that stuff, even though you're going to have different code running in each thread.
So all of that runtime state is everything that Python needs in order to run.
But what's interesting is that the vast majority of it, you can think of as the actual interpreter.
And so that state, if we treat it as isolated and we're very careful about it, then we can have multiple of them.
That means that when your Python code runs, that it can run with a different set of this global state, different modules imported, different things going on, different threads that are unrelated and really don't affect each other at all.
And then with that in mind, you can take it one step farther and say, well, let's completely isolate those and like not even have them share a GIL.
Right. And then at that point, that's where the magic kind of happens.
So that's kind of the my first goal in this whole project was to get to that point, because once you get there, then it opens up a lot of possibilities when it comes to concurrency.
and parallelism yeah then anthony can start running with his blog posts and showing off cool things
yeah absolutely so one thing i don't know the answer to but might be interesting is python has
a memory management story in front of the operating system virtual memory that's assigned to the
process with pools arenas blocks those kind of things what's that look like with regard to
sub interpreters just so each sub interpreter have its own chunk or set of those for the memory it
allocates or is it still a shared one thing per process it's it's per interpreter this is something
that was very global and and like you pointed out earlier this whole project was all about taking
all sorts of global state that was actually stored
in like C global variables all over the place, right?
And pulling those in together into one place
and moving those down from kind of the process global state
down into each interpreter.
So one of those things was all of the allocator state
that we have for objects.
And Python kind of has this idea of different levels
allocators the object allocator is what's used heavily for python objects of course but some
other state as well and the object allocator is uh is the part that has all the arenas and everything
like you're saying yeah so so part of what i did before we could make the GIL per interpreter
we had to make the allocator state per interpreter
Well, the reason I think that it's interesting asking about it,
one, because of the guilt, obviously,
but the other one is it seems to me like these sub interpreters
could be used for a little bit of stability or isolation.
You want to run some kind of code,
and when that line exits, I want the memory freed.
I want modules unloaded.
I want it to go back to the way it was.
You know what I mean?
Whereas normally in Python, even if the memory becomes free,
it's still got some of that like, well, we allocated this stuff.
or holding it to refill it and then you don't unimport modules.
But modules can be pretty intense, actually,
if they start allocating a bunch of stuff themselves and so on.
What do you guys think about this as an idea, as an aspect of it?
Yeah, there's one example I've been coming across recently
and this is a pattern.
I think it's a bit of an anti-pattern, actually,
but some Python packages, they store like some state information in the module level.
So an example is a SDK that I've been working with,
which has just been rewritten to stop it from doing this.
But you would put the API key of the SDK, you would import it.
So you'd import X and then do like X dot API key equals.
So it basically stores the API key in the module object,
which is fine if you've imported the module once
and you're using it once.
But what you see is that if you put that in a web application,
it just assumes that everyone uses the same key.
So you can't import that module
and then connect to it with different API keys.
you'd have different users or something.
Right.
You had some kind of moldy tenancy, right?
Where they would say, enter their ChatGPT, OpenAI key,
and then they could work on behalf of that, right?
Potentially something like that, right?
Yeah, exactly.
So that's kind of like an API example,
but there are other examples where,
let's say you're loading data or something,
and it stores some temporary information somewhere in a class attribute
or even like a module attribute like that,
then if you've got one piece of code loading data
and then in another thread in a web app
or just in another thread generally,
you're reading another piece of data
and they're sharing state somehow
and you've got no isolation.
Some of that is due to the way
that people have written the Python code
or the extension code has kind of been built around,
oh, we'll just put this information here
and they haven't really thought about the isolation.
Sometimes it's because on the C level especially,
that because the GIL was always there,
they've never had to worry about it.
So you could just have a counter, for example,
or there's an object which is a dictionary
that is a cache of something,
and you just put that as a static variable,
and you just read and write from it.
You've never had to worry about thread safety
because the guild was there to kind of protect you.
You probably shouldn't have built it that way,
but it didn't really matter because it worked.
What about this, Anthony?
What if we can write it on one line?
It'll probably be safe, right?
If we can fit it on just one line of Python code,
it'll be okay?
Yeah.
Dictionary.add, what's wrong there?
Dictionary.get, it's fine.
Yeah.
So yeah, what we're saying,
within sub-interpreters,
I think what's the concept that people will need to kind of understand is where the isolation is.
Because there are different models for running parallel code.
And at the moment, we've got coroutines, which is asynchronous.
So it can run concurrently.
So that's if you do async and a wait or if you use the old coroutine decorator.
You've also got things like generators, which are kind of like a concurrent pattern.
you've got threads that you can create
all of those live within the same interpreter
and they share the same information
so you don't have to
if you create a thread
inside that thread
you can read a variable from outside of that thread
and it doesn't complain
you don't need to create a lock at the moment
although in some situations you probably should
and you don't need to re-import modules and stuff like that which yeah which can be fine and then at
the other extreme you've got multi-processing which is a module in the standard library that allows you
to create extra python processes and then kind of gives you like an api to talk to them and share
information between them and that's kind of like the app the other extreme which is you've got on it
is the you know the ultimate level of isolation you've got a whole separate python process
um but instead of interacting with it via the command line you've kind of got this nicer
api where you can almost treat it like it's in the same process as the one you're running from
yeah it's kind of magical actually that at all where you get a return value from a process for
example right yeah um but the thing is if you peel back the covers a little bit then like how it sends
information to the other python process involves a lot of pickles um and it's not particularly
efficient and also a python process has a lot of extra stuff that you maybe necessarily didn't even
need like you get all this isolation from having it but you have to import all the modules again
you have to create the arenas again or the memory allocation you have to do all the startup process
again which takes a lot of time it's like at least the python code again right at least the pyc yeah
yeah yeah exactly so you basically created like a whole separate python um and if you do that just
to run a small chunk of code um then it's not probably the best model at all yeah you have a
nice graph as well that shows like sort of the rate as you add more work and you need more
parallelism. We'll get to that, I'm sure. You know, one thing that struck me coming to Python
from other languages like C, C++, C#, there's very little locks and events threading,
coordinating stuff in Python. And I think that there's probably a ton of Python code that actually
is not actually thread safe, but people kind of get away with it because the context switching is
so coarse-grained, right?
Like you say, well, the gills there,
so you only run one instruction at a time,
but like this temporary invalid state you enter to
as part of like just your code running,
like took money out of this account
and then I'm going to put it into that account.
Those are multiple Python lines
and there's nothing saying they couldn't get interrupted
between one to the other
and then things are busted, right?
I feel there's some concern
about adding this concurrency,
like, oh, we're having to worry about it.
Like you probably should be worrying about it now.
not as much necessarily, but it's,
I feel like people are getting away with it because it's so rare, but it's not,
it's a non-zero possibility. What do you guys think?
Yeah. I mean, those are real concerns.
It's as there's been lots of discussion with the no-go work about really what,
what matters, what, what people we need to care about,
really what impact it's going to have.
And I mean, it's probably going to have some impact
on people with Python code,
but it'll especially have impact on people
that maintain extension modules.
But it really is all the pain that comes with free threading.
That's what it introduces with the benefits as well, of course.
but what's interesting
I'd like to think of
sub interpreters kind of
provide the same facility
but they force you to be
explicit about
what gets shared
and they force you to do it in a thread safe way
so
you can't do it without thread safety
and so
it's not an issue
and it doesn't hurt that
people really
haven't used sub interpreters extensively up till now whereas threads are kind of something that's
been around for quite a while yeah it has been in well it's sub interpreters have traditionally
just been a thing you can do from c extensions or the c api which really limits them from being used
in just a standard like i'm working on my web app so let's just throw in a couple sub interpreters
as you know.
But in 3.13,
is that when we're looking at having
a Python-level API for creating,
interacting with?
Yeah, I've been working on a PEP for that,
pep554.
It recently created a new pep
to replace that one,
which is pep734.
That's the one.
So that's the one that I'm targeting for 3.13.
And it's pretty straightforward.
Create interpreters and kind of look at them
and with an interpreter, run some code.
You know, pretty basic stuff.
And then also, because sub interpreters
aren't quite so useful if you can't cooperate between them,
there's also a queue type that you push stuff on,
and you pop stuff off and just pretty basic.
So you could write something like await q.pop
or something like that.
Excellent.
Yeah, this is really cool.
And the other thing that I want to talk about here,
looks like you already have it in the pep,
which is excellent.
Somehow I missed that before,
is that we have thread pool executors,
we have multi-processing pool executors,
and this would be an interpreter pool executor.
what's the thinking there
people are already familiar with using
concurrent futures so
if we can present the same
API for sub interpreters
it makes it really easy
because you can set it up with
multiprocessing or threads
and switch it over to one of the other
pool types without a lot of fuss
right basically with a clever
import statement you're good to go
right from whatever
import like multiprocessing pool
executor as pool executor or interpreter pool executor as pool executor and then the rest of
code could stay potentially. Yeah. What I expected. The communication, it's got to be a basic situation.
Yeah. Right. Because there are assumptions. Yeah. Yeah. And it should work mostly the same way
that you already use it with threads and multiprocessing. But we'll see. There's some
some limitations with sub interpreters currently that I'm,
I'm sure we'll work on solving as, as we can, but,
so we'll see.
It may not be quite as efficient as I'd like at first with the interpreter
pool executor,
because we'll probably end up doing some pickling stuff,
kind of like multiprocessing does.
Although I expect it'll be a little more efficient.
I was going to, I was going to save this for later,
but I think maybe it's worth talking about now.
So first of all, Anthony, you wrote a lot about and have actually had some recent influence on what you can pass across, say, the starting code and then the running interpreter that's kind of like the sub interpreter doing extra work.
Want to talk about what data exchange there is?
Yeah.
So when you're using any of these models, multiprocessing, sub interpreters or threading, I guess you've got two or three things to worry about.
One is how do you create it in the first place?
So how do you create a process?
How do you create an interpreter?
How do you create a thread?
The second thing is how do you send data to it?
Because normally the reason you've created them
is because you need it to do some work.
So you've got the code,
which is when you spawn it, when you create it.
The code that you want it to run,
but that code needs some sort of input.
And that's probably going to be Python objects.
It might be reading files, for example,
or listening to a network socket.
So it might be getting its input from somewhere else.
But typically you need to give it parameters.
Now, the way that works in multiprocessing
is mostly reliant on Pickle.
So if you start a process and you give it some data,
either as a parameter or you create a queue
and you send data down the queue or the pipe, for example,
it pickles the data.
So you can put a Python object in,
it uses the pickle module,
it converts that into a byte string,
and then it basically converts the byte string
on the other end back into objects.
That's got its limitations
because not everything can be pickled.
And also some objects,
especially if you've got like an object
which has got objects in it
and it's deeply nested
or you've got a big complicated dictionary
or something that's got all these strange types in it which can't necessarily be rehydrated from
just from a byte string um an alternative actually i do want to point out because
for people who come across this issue quite a lot there's another package called dill on pypi
um so if you think of packet pickle i think of dill um dill is very similar to pickle it has the
same interface but it can pickle slightly more exotic objects than pickle can so often if you
find that you've tried to pickle something you try to share it with a process or a sub interpreter
and it comes back and says this can't be pickled you can try dill and see if that see if that works
so yeah that's the typical way of doing it is that you would you'd pickle an object and then
on the other end, you would basically unpickle it back into another object.
The downside of that is that it's pretty slow.
It's equivalent, like if you use the JSON module in Python,
it's kind of similar, I guess, to converting something into JSON
and then converting it from JSON back into a dictionary on the other end.
Like it's not a super efficient way of doing it.
So sub-interpreters have another mechanism.
I haven't read PEP 734 yet.
So I don't know how much of this is in the new PEP, Eric,
or if it's in the queue.
But there's a...
It's much the same.
Okay, it's much the same.
So there's another mechanism with subinterpreters
because they share the same process,
whereas multiprocessing doesn't, they're separate processes.
Because they say the same process,
you can basically put some data in a memory space,
which can be read from a separate interpreter.
Now you need to be, well, Python needs to be really careful.
You don't need to worry too much about it
because that complexity is done for you.
But there are certain types of objects that you can put in as parameters.
You can send either a startup variables for your sub-interpreter
or you can send via like a pipe basically backwards and forwards
between the interpreters.
and these are essentially all the immutable types for python which is like string unicode strings
byte strings um bool none integer float and tuples um and you can do tuples of tuples as well
and uh it seems like the tuple part had to uh something that you added recently right so i
implemented people sharing just last week.
Yeah, that was that's in now.
I really wanted to use it.
So I thought, well, instead of keep,
I kept complaining that it wasn't there.
So I thought instead of complaining,
I might as well talk to Eric
and work out how to implement it.
But yeah, you can't share dictionaries.
Yeah, exactly.
So one thing that I thought that might be awesome.
Are you familiar with msgspec?
Have you guys seen msgspec?
It's like Pydantic in the sense that you create a class with types,
but the parsing performance is quite a bit, like much, much faster.
80 times faster than Pydantic,
10 times faster than Marshero and Seatters and so on.
And faster still even than, say, JSON or UJSON.
So maybe it makes sense to use this, turn it into its serialization formats bytes,
send the bytes over and then pull it back.
I don't know.
Might give you a nice...
Yeah, you can share byte string.
So you can stick something into pickle.
You can use like a msgspec or something like that to serialize something into a byte string
and then receive it on the other end and rehydrate it.
Or even Pydantic.
Like Pydantic is awesome as well.
just this is meant to be super fast with a little bit of less behavior right yeah so this is a kind
of a design thing i think people need to consider when they're like great i can run everything in
parallel now um but you have to kind of unwind and think about how you designed your application like
at which point do you fork off the work yeah and how do you sit how do you split the data
you can't just kind of go into it assuming oh we'll just have a pool of workers and we've kind
of got this shared area of right i'll pass it a point or two everybody just million yeah i'll pass
it a point or two a million entry list and i'll just run with it yeah because i mean in any language
you're going to get issues if you if you do that um even if you've got shared memory and it's easier
to read and write to the different spaces you're going to get issues with locking and i think it's
also important with free threading if you read the spec or kind of follow what's happening
with free free threading it's not like the gills disappeared um the gills been replaced with other
locks um yeah so there are still there are still going to be locks you can't just have no locks
um if you've got cross threads right like it it moves some of the reference counting stuff into
like well it's it's fast on the default thread the same thread but if it goes to another it has
to kick in another more thread safe case that potentially is slower and so on yeah um so yeah
the really important thing with sub interpreters is that they have their own um well have their own
gill so each one has its own lock so they can run fully in parallel just as they could
with multi-processing so i feel like the closer comparison with sub interpreters is multi-processing
yeah um because they basically run fully in parallel if you start four of them and you have
four cores each core is going to be busy doing work um you start them you give them data you can
interact with them whilst they're running um and then when they're finished they can close and they
can be destroyed and cleaned up um so it's much closer to multi-processing um but the big
kind of the big difference is that the overhead both on the memory and cpu side of things is
much smaller um separate processes with multi-processing are pretty heavyweight that
they're big workers um and then the other thing that's pretty significant is um the time it takes
to start one um so starting a process with multi-processing takes quite a lot of time
um and it's significantly i think it's like 20 or 30 times faster to start a sub-interpreter
you have a bunch of graphs for it somewhere there we go yeah
so i scrolled past it there we go
it's not exactly the same but kind of captures a lot of it there uh so one thing that i think is
exciting Eric is the interpreter pool sub interpreter pool because a lot of the the
difference between the threading and the sub interpreter performance is that startup of
the new arenas and like importing the standard library all that kind of stuff that still is going
to happen but once that those things are loaded up in the process they could be handed work
easily right and so if you've got a pool of you know like say that you have 10 cores you got 10
of them just chilling or however many you know you've sort of done enough work to like do in
parallel then you could have them laying around and just send like okay now i want you to run this
function and now i want you to run this and that one means go call that api and then process it and
I think you could get the difference between threading and subinterpreters a lot lower by having them kind of reuse, basically.
Yep.
Absolutely.
There's some of the key difference, I think, is mostly that when you have mutable data, whereas with threads, you can share it.
So threads can kind of talk to each other through the data that they share with each other.
Whereas with subinterpreters, there are a lot of restrictions, and I expect we'll work on that to an extent.
But it's also part of the programming model.
And like Anthony was saying, if you really want to take advantage of parallelism, you need to think about it.
You need to actually be careful about your data and how you're splitting up your work.
I think there's going to be design patterns that we come to know or conventions we come to know, like, let's suppose I need some calculation and I'm going to use it in a for loop.
You don't run the calculation if it's the same over and over.
Every time through the loop, you run it and then you use the result, right?
So in this, you know, a similar thing here would be like, well, if you're going to process a bunch of data and the data comes from, say, a database, don't do the query and hand it all the records.
Just tell it, go get that data from the database.
That way it's already serialized in the right process.
And there's not this cross serialization
to either pickling or whatever mechanism
you come up with, right?
But like try to think about when you get the data,
can you delay it until it's in the sub process
or sub interpreter rather and so on, right?
Yeah, definitely.
One interesting thing is that PEP734,
I've included memory view as one of the types that supported.
So basically you can take a memory view of any kind of object that
implements the buffer protocol.
So like NumPy arrays and stuff like that.
And pass that memory view through to another interpreter and you can use it
and it doesn't make a copy or anything.
It actually uses the same underlying data that actually gets shared.
Oh, that's interesting.
Yeah.
So there's, and I think there's even more room for that with other types, but we're starting small.
But the key thing there is that, like you're saying,
I mean, with coming up with different models and patterns
and libraries, I'm sure they'll come up
as people feel out really what's the easiest way
to take advantage of these features.
And that's the sort of thing that will apply
not just to general free-threaded, like, no-gil,
but also sub-interpreters.
definitely
it's going to be exciting
so I guess
I want to move on and talk about working with this in Python
and the stuff that you've done
Anthony but maybe a quick comment
from the audience is Jazzy asks
is this built on top of a queue
which is built on top of a link list because I'm building
this and my research led me
to these data structures
I guess that's the communication
cross sub interpreter
cross interpreter communication
yeah with sub interpreters like in PEP 734 it's a a queue implements the same interfaces
as the queue from the queue module but there's there's no reason why people couldn't implement
whatever data structure they want for communicating between sub interpreters and then that data
structure is in charge of of preserving thread safety and and so forth yep excellent yeah it's
not a standard queue. It's like a concurrent queue or something along those lines. Yeah. Yeah. All
right. So all of this we've been talking about here is, you know, we're looking at this, this
cool interpreter pool executor stuff that's in draft format, Anthony, for 3.13. And somehow I'm
looking at this running Python parallel applications and sub interpreters that you wrote. What's going
on here how do you do this magic uh you need to know the secret secret password um so in python
in python 3 12 um the c api for creating sub interpreters uh was included and a lot of the
mechanism for creating sub interpreters was included.
So there's also a, in CPython, there's a standard library, which I think everybody kind of knows.
And then there are some like hidden modules, which are mostly used for testing.
So not all of them get bundled, I think, in the distribution.
I think a lot of the test modules get taken out.
But there are some hidden modules you can use for testing
because a lot of the test suite for CPython has to test C APIs
and nobody really wants to write unit tests in C.
So they write the tests in Python
and then they kind of create these modules
that basically just call the C functions.
And so you can get the test coverage
and do the testing from Python code.
So I guess what was from PEPF 6,
I can't remember.
I look at how many PEPs 6, 6, Eric will probably know.
What is now PEP 734,
but the Python interface to create sub-interpreters,
a version of that was included in 3.12.
So you can import this module called underscore XX sub-interpreters.
And it's called underscore XX
because it kind of indicates that it's experimental
and it's underscore because you probably shouldn't be using it.
It's not safe for work to me.
I mean, I don't know.
But it provides a good way of people actually testing this stuff
and seeing what happens if I import my C extension
from a sub-interpreter.
So that's kind of some of what I've been doing
is looking at, okay, what can we try and do in parallel?
And this blog post, I wanted to try a WSGI or an ASCII web app.
And the typical pattern that you have at the moment,
and I guess how a lot of people would be using parallel code
but without really realizing it,
is when you deploy a web app for Django Flask or FastAPI,
you can't have one GIL per web server.
Because if you've got one GIL per web server,
you can only have one user per website, which is not great.
So the way that most web servers implement this
is that they have a pool of workers.
GUnicorn does that by spawning Python processes
and then using the multi-processing module.
So it basically creates multiple Python processes
all listening to the same socket.
And then when a web request comes in,
one of them takes that request.
It also then inside that has a thread pool.
So even basically a thread pool is better for concurrent code.
So Gunicorn normally is used in a multi-worker, multi-thread model.
That's how we kind of talk about it.
So you'd have the number of workers that you have CPU cores
and then inside that you'd have multiple threads.
So it kind of means you can handle more requests at a time.
If you've got eight calls, you can handle at least eight requests at a time.
However, because most web code can be concurrent on the back end, like you're making a database query or you're reading some stuff from a file like that, that doesn't necessarily need to hold the GIL.
So you can run it concurrently, which is why you have multiple threads.
So even if you've only got eight CPU calls,
you can actually handle 16 or 32 web requests at once
because some of them will be waiting for the database server
to finish running its SQL query
or the API that it called to actually reply.
So what I wanted to do with this experiment
was to look at the multi-worker, multi-thread model for web apps
and say, okay, could the worker be a sub-interpreter?
and like what difference would that make?
So instead of using multiprocessing for the workers,
could I use subinterpreters for the workers?
So even though the Python interface in 3.12 is experimental,
they basically wanted to adapt Hypercorn,
which is a web server for ASCII and WSCE apps in Python.
They wanted to adapt Hypercorn
and basically start Hypercorn workers from a subinterpreter pool
and then seeing if I can run Django, Flask, and FastAPI in a subinterpreter.
So a single process, a single Python process,
but running across multiple cores and listening to web requests
and basically running and serving web requests with multiple gills.
So that was the task.
In your article, you said you had started with a Gunicorn
and they just made too many assumptions about the web workers being truly subprocesses.
But Hypercorn was a better fit, you said, from Phil.
Yeah, it was easier to implement this experiment in Hypercorn.
It had like a single entry point.
Because when you start an interpreter, when you start a sub-interpreter,
you need to import the modules that you want to use.
You can't just say, run this function over here.
You can, but if that function relies on something else that you've imported,
you need to import that from the new sub-interpreter.
So what I did with this experiment was basically start a sub interpreter that imports Hypercorn,
listens to the sockets, and then is ready to serve web requests.
Interesting. Okay. And at a minimum, you got it working, right?
Yeah, it did a hello world. So we got that got that working. So I was, yeah, pleased with that.
and then kind of started doing some more testing of it so you know how many concurrent requests can
i make at once how does it handle that what does my cpu core load look like is it distributing it
well um and then kind of some of the questions are you know how do you share data between
the sub interpreters um so the minimum i had to do was each sub interpreter needs to know
which web socket should I be listening to so like which network socket once I've started
what port is it running on um and is it running on multiple ports and which one should I listen to so
yeah that's the first thing I had to do nice yeah maybe just tell people real quick about just like
what are the commands like at the python level that you look at in order to create an interpreter
run some code on it and so on.
What's this weird world look like?
Eric, do you want to cover that?
Yeah, there is a whole lot.
I mean, if we talk about PEP 734,
you have an interpreters module
with a create function in it
that returns you an interpreter object.
And then once you have the interpreter object,
you'll have, it has a function called run or a method.
And the interpreter object also has a method called exec.
I'm trying to remember, there's exec sync
because it's synchronous with the current thread.
And whereas exec run will create a new thread for you
and run things in that there.
So they're kind of different use cases,
but it's basically the same thing.
You have some code currently supports,
just you give it a string with all your code on it,
like you loaded from a file or something, you know,
basically it's a script that's gonna run
in that sub interpreter.
Alternately, you can give it a function.
And as long as that function isn't a closure,
doesn't have any arguments and stuff like that.
So it's just like really basic,
basically a script, right?
If you got something like that,
you can also pass that through.
And then it runs it.
And that's just about it.
If you want to get some results back,
you're going to have to manually pass them back
kind of like you do with threads.
But that's something people already understand pretty well.
Right, and create one of those channels,
and then you just wait for it to exit
and then read from the channel, something like that.
Yeah.
Yeah, and so there's a way to say things like
just run and there's also a way to say create an interpreter and then you could use the interpreter
to do things and that lets you only pay the process like startup cost ones right yeah
yeah and you can also you can call that the run multiple times and each time it kind of adds
on to what ran before.
So if you run some code that modifies things
or import some modules and that sort of thing,
those will still be there the next time
you run some code in that interpreter,
which is nice because then if you've got some startup stuff
that you need to do one time,
you can do that ahead of time
right after you create the interpreter.
But then in kind of your loop in your worker,
then you run again and all that stuff is ready to go.
Oh, that's interesting.
Because when I think about, say, my web apps,
a lot of them talk to MongoDB and use Beanie.
And you go to Beanie and you tell it to, like,
create a connection or a MongoDB client pool.
And it does all that stuff.
And then you just ambiently talk to it.
Kind of like Django or whatever, right?
Go to that class and do a query on it.
You could run that startup code, like, once potentially
and have that pool just hanging around for subsequent work.
Nice.
All right.
uh let's see some more stuff so um you said you got it working pretty well anthony and you said
one of the challenges was trying to get it to shut down right yeah yeah so in python when you start
a python process you can press ctrl c um to quit which is a keyboard interrupt um that kind of sends
the interrupt in that process um all of these web servers have got like a mechanism for cleanly
shutting down because you don't want to just if you press ctrl c you don't just terminate the
processes um because when you write a an asgip app in particular you can have like events that
you can do so people who've done fast api probably know they're like the on event um decorator that
you can put and say when my app starts up create a database connection pool and when it shuts down
then go and clean up all this stuff so um if the web servers decided to shut down for whatever
reason whether you've pressed ctrl c or it just decided to close for whatever reason um it needs
to tell all the workers to shut down cleanly um so signals uh like the signals module um
doesn't work between sub interpreters because it kind of it sits in the interpreter state
from what i understand um so what i did was basically use a channel so that the main
worker like the coordinator when that had a shutdown request it would send a message to all
the sub interpreters to say okay can you stop now um and then it would kick off um a job basically
tell Hypercorn in this case to shut down cleanly,
call any shutdown functions that you might have,
and then log a message to say that it's shutting down as well.
Because the other thing is with web servers is
if it just terminated immediately and then you looked at your logs
and you were like, okay, why did the website suddenly stop working
and there was no log entries?
It just went from I'm handling requests to just absolute silence.
That also wouldn't be very helpful.
so it needs to write log messages it needs to call like shutdown functions and stuff
um so what i did was um and this is i guess where it's kind of a bit of a turtles all the way down
but inside the sub interpreter i start another thread um because if you have a polar which
listens to a signal on a channel that's a blocking operation um so you know at the bottom of my
sub-interpreter code I've got okay run Hypercorn so it's going to run it's going to listen to
socket serve web requests but I need to also be able to run concurrently in the sub-interpreter
a loop which listens to the communication channel and sees if a shutdown request has been sent
so this is kind of a maybe an implementation detail of how interpreters work in in python but
interpreters have threads as well so you can start threads inside interpreters um so similar to what
i said with g unicorn and hypercorn how you've got multi-worker multi-thread like each worker has
its own threads um in python interpreters have the threads so you can start a sub-interpreter
and then inside that sub-interpreter you can also start multiple threads um and you can do
co-routines and all that kind of stuff as well um so basically what i did is to start a
sub interpreter which also starts a thread and that thread listens to the communication channel and
then waits for a shutdown request right tell tells uh hyperhorn all right you're done we're out of
here yeah okay interesting here's a interesting question from the audience from chris well it says
when you we talked about the global kind of startup like if you run that once it'd already be set
and you know does that make code somewhat non-deterministic in the sub interpreter
i mean if you explicitly work with it no but if you're doing the pool like which one do you get
is it initialized or not Eric do you have an idea of a startup function that runs in the
interpreter pool executor type thing or is it just they get doled out and they run what they run
uh you with uh with concurrent features it's already kind of a a pattern you have an initialized
function that you can call that'll do the right thing and then uh and then you have your work
that actually your your task that the worker's actually running um so with the
I don't know.
I wouldn't say it's non-deterministic
unless you have no control over it.
If you want to make sure that state progresses
in an expected way,
then you're going to run your own subinterpreters.
But if you have no control over the subinterpreters,
you're just handing off to some library
that's using subinterpreters,
I would think it'd be somewhat not quite so important
about whether it's deterministic or not.
I mean, each time it runs,
there are a variety of things,
the whole thing could be kind of reset
or you could make sure that anything that runs,
any part of your code that runs
is careful to keep its state self-contained
and therefore preserve deterministic behavior that way.
- The one thing I do a lot is I'll write code
that'll say, if this is already initialized,
don't do it again.
So I talked about like the database connection thing.
If somebody were to call it twice, it'll say, well,
looks like the connection's already not none.
So we're good, right?
You could just always run the startup code
with one of these short circuit things that says,
hey, it looks like on this interpreter,
this is already done, we're good.
But that would probably handle
a good chunk of it right there.
But we're back to this thing that Anthony said, right?
Like we're gonna learn some new programming patterns,
potentially.
Yeah, quite interesting.
So we talked at the beginning
about how sub interpreters have their own memory
and their own module loads and all those kinds of things.
And that might be potentially interesting for isolation.
Also kind of tying back to Chris's comment here,
this isolation is pretty interesting for testing, right, Anthony?
Like pytest?
So another thing you've been up to is working with trying to run pytest sessions
in subinterpreters.
Tell people about that.
Yeah.
So I started off with a web worker.
One of the things I hit with a web worker was that I couldn't start Django applications.
And realized the reason was the, so the date time module.
So the Python standard library, some of the modules are implemented in Python.
Some of them are implemented in C.
Some of them are a combination of both.
So some modules you import in the standard library have like a C part that's been implemented in a C for performance reasons typically or because it needs some special operating system API that you can't access from Python.
And then the front end is Python.
So there is a list basically of standard library modules that are written in C that have some sort of global state.
And then the core developers have been going down that list
and fixing them up so that they can be imported from a sub-interpreter
or just marking them as not compatible with sub-interpreters.
One such example was the ReadLine module
that Eric and I were kind of working on last week and the week before.
ReadLine is used for, I guess, listening to user input.
So if you run the input built in,
like read line is one of the utilities it uses to listen to keyboard input um if you start let's say
you started five sub interpreters at the same time and all of them did a read line listened for input
like what would you expect the behavior to be um which when you type in the keyboard exactly yeah
where would you expect the letters to come out so it kind of poses an interesting question um
So ReadLine is not compatible with sub-interpreters,
but it discovered it was actually sharing a global state.
So when it initialized, it would install a callback.
And what that meant was that even though it said it's not compatible,
if you started multiple sub-interpreters that imported ReadLine,
it would crash Python itself.
The date time module is another one that needs fixing.
It installs a bunch of global state.
So yeah, date time was another one.
So what I wanted to do is to try and test some other C extensions that I had
and just basically write a pytest extension, pytest plugin, I guess,
which you've got an existing pytest suite,
but you want to run all of that in a sub-interpreter.
And the goal of this is really that you're developing a C extension,
you've written a test suite already for pytest,
and you want to run that inside a sub-interpreter.
So I'm looking at this from a couple of different angles,
but I want to really try and use sub-interpreters in other ways,
import some C extensions that have never even considered
the idea of sub interpreters and just see how they respond to it um like read line was a good example
like i think it was a this won't it won't work but the fact that it crashed how is it going to crash
right like what's happening there yeah so it should have it should have kind of just said this is not
compatible and that's kind of uncovered a um and this is all super experimental as well so like
this is not, you know, you've had to import the underscore XX module to even try this.
So yeah, there's read line, date time was another one. And so I put this sort of pytest extension
together so that I could run some existing test suites inside subinterpreters. And then the next
thing that I looked at doing was CPython has a huge test suite. So basically how all of Python
itself is tested, the parser, the compiler, the evaluation loop, all the standard library modules
have got pretty good test coverage. So like when you compile Python from source or you make changes
on GitHub, like it runs the test suite to make sure that your changes didn't break anything.
Now, the next thing I kind of wanted to look at was, okay, can we, to try and kind of get ahead
of the curve really on sub-interpreter adoption. So in 3.13, when PEP 7.3.4 lands, can we try and
test all of the standard library inside a sub-interpreter and see if it has any other
weird behaviors um and this test will probably apply to free threading as well to be honest
because i think um any anything that you're you're doing like this you're importing these c
extensions which always assume that there was a big GIL in place um if you take away that
assumption then you get these strange behaviors um so yeah the next thing i've been working on
is basically running the c python test suite inside sub-interpreters and then seeing
what kind of weird behaviors pop up.
I think it's a great idea because obviously
CPython is going to need to run code
in a sub-interpreter, run R code, right?
So at a minimum, the framework interpreter,
all the runtime bits, that should hang together, right?
Yeah, there are some modules that doesn't make sense
to run in sub-interpreters.
Readline was an example.
Some TK, maybe.
Yeah, possibly.
- Maybe not.
- So if you think about like,
if you got, when you're doing GUI programming, right?
You're gonna have a kind of your core stuff
running the main thread, right?
And then you hand off,
you may have sub threads doing some other work,
but the core of the application,
think of it as running in the main thread.
I think of applications in that way.
And there's certain things that you do in Python,
standard library modules,
that really only make sense with that main thread.
So supporting those in subinterpreters
isn't quite as meaningful.
Yeah.
I can't remember all the details.
So I feel like there's some parts of Windows itself,
some UI frameworks there that required
that you access them on the main program thread,
not on some background thread as well
because it would freak things out.
So it seems like not unreasonable.
Yeah, same is true.
Like the signal module,
if I remember right,
add exit,
a few others.
Excellent.
All right.
Well, I guess let's,
we're getting short on time.
Let's wrap it up with this.
So the big thing to keep an eye on really here is PEP 734,
because that's when this would land.
you're no longer with the underscore xx sub interpreter you're just or you're just working
with interpreters sub module yeah 313 yeah so right now it's in draft like what's it looking like
if it'll be in 313 it'll be in 313 alpha something some beta something like when is
this going to start looking like a thing that is ready for people to play with so i yes
Yeah, this PEP, I went through and did a massive cleanup of PEP554, which is why I made a new PEP for it.
And simplified a lot of things, clarified a lot of points, had lots of good feedback from people and ended up with what I think is a good API, but it was a little different in some ways.
So I've had the implementation for PEP554 mostly done and ready to go for years.
And so it was a matter, it's been a matter of now that I have this, this updated PEP up, going back to the implementation, tweaking it to match, and then making sure everything still feels right.
Try and use it in a few cases.
And if everything looks good, then go ahead and I'll start a discussion on that.
I'm hoping within the next week or two to start up a round of discussion about this PEP.
And hopefully we won't have a whole lot of back and forth so I can get this over to the steering councils in the near future.
Well, the hard work has been done already, right?
The C layer is there and it's accepted and it's in there.
Now it's just a matter of what's the right way to look at it from Python, right?
And one thing to keep in mind is that I'm planning on backporting the module to Python 3.12,
just so that we have a per interpreter GALN 3.12,
so it'd be nice if people could really take advantage of it.
I see. So for that one, we'd have to pip install it, or would it be added as...
Yeah, pip install.
Okay.
I probably won't support before 3.12.
I mean, subinterpreters have been around for decades,
but only through the CAPI.
But that said, I doubt I'll backport this module past 3.12.
So just 3.12 and up.
That's more than I expected anyway, so that's pretty cool.
All right, final thoughts, you guys.
What do you want to tell people about this stuff?
Personally, I'm excited for where everything's going.
It's taken a while, but I think we're getting to a good place.
It's interesting with all the discussion about no-gil,
it's easy to think, oh, then why do we need sub-interpreters?
Or if we have sub-interpreters, why do we need no-gil?
But they're kind of different needs that they're meeting.
The most interesting thing for me is that what's good for no-gil
is good for sub-interpreters and vice versa.
that no gil probably really wouldn't be possible without a lot of the work that we've done to make a per interpreter gil possible.
So I think that's one of the neat things.
The future is looking bright for Python multi-core.
And I'm excited to see where people go with all these things that we're adding.
Anthony, when's the sub-interpreters programming design patterns
about coming out?
Yeah, my thoughts are, well, there's a sub-interpreters
I mentioned in my book actually when it was like Python 3.9, I think.
Because it was possible then, but it's changed quite a lot since.
I guess some thoughts to leave people with.
I think if you're a maintainer of a Python package
or a C extension module in a Python package,
there's going to be a lot more exotic scenarios
for you to test coming in the next year or so.
And some of those uncover things that you might have done
or just kind of relied on the GIL with global state
where that's not really desirable anymore
and you're going to get bugs down the line.
So I think with any of that stuff as a package maintainer,
you want to test as many scenarios as you can
so that you can catch bugs and fix them before your users find them.
So if you are a package maintainer,
there's definitely some things that you can start to look at now to test
that's available in 313 Alpha 2 is at least probably the one I've tried,
to be honest.
and if you're a developer not necessarily a maintainer then I think this is a good time to
start reading up on like parallel programming and how you need to design parallel programs
and that those kind of concepts are the same across all languages and you know Python would
be no different we just have different mechanisms for starting parallel work and joining it back
together um but if you're interested in this and you want to run more code in parallel and there's
definitely some stuff to read and some stuff to learn about in terms of um you know signals pipes
queues um sharing data how you have locks and where you should put them um how deadlocks can occur
um things like that so all of that stuff is the same in python as anywhere else we just have
different mechanisms for doing it.
All right.
Well, people have some research work.
I guess a really, really quick final question,
Eric, and we'll wrap this up.
Following up on what Anthony said,
like test your stuff,
make sure it works in a sub-interpreter.
If for some reason you're like,
my code will not work in a sub-interpreter and I'm not ready yet,
is there a way to determine that your code is being run in
a sub-interpreter rather than regularly from your Python code?
Yeah, if you have an extension module that supports sub interpreters,
then you will have updated your module to use what's called multi-phase init.
And that's something that shouldn't be too hard to look up.
I think I talked about it in the PEP.
If you implement multi-phase init,
then you've already done most of the work to support a sub interpreter.
The, if, if you haven't,
then your module can't be imported in a sub-interpreter.
It'll actually fail with an import error.
If you try and import it in a sub-interpreter or at least a sub-interpreter that has its own GIL.
There are ways to create sub-interpreters that still share GIL and that sort of thing.
But you, you just won't be able to import it at all.
So like the read line module can't be imported in sub interpreters.
The issue that Anthony ran into is kind of a subtle side effect of the check that we're doing.
So, but really it boils down to if you don't implement multi-phase init,
then you won't be able to import the module.
You'll just get an importer.
So that's, I mean, it makes it kind of straightforward.
Yeah. Sounds good. More opt-in than opt-out. Yep. Right on.
All right, guys.
Thank you both for coming back on the show and awesome work is looking close to
the fetish line and exciting. Thanks Michael. Yep. See y'all.
Yeah.